our last totally random topic of the day
before we move on to the main narrative
and we'll be immutability so what is
immutability it's a concept that we
applied to specific types and will say
that a type is immutable if when you
instantiate something of that type it
can never change no matter what so as an
example of some mutable things let's say
an array deck so an array deck when you
make one
it is certainly mutable you can add
first add last and so forth planets
likewise are mutable their velocity can
change their positions can change but
there are also other classes which are
fully immutable so for example integers
are immutable once you create an integer
once you wrap an integer in it that
integer inside that wrapper can never
change as maybe a more specific example
that's not too simple let's think about
the date class so it's just a class
actor together it has three int fields
that are all declared as public final it
has a private boolean that's called
contrived since this is a very contrived
class and it has a constructor so once
you make a date there's nothing you can
do to ever change any aspect of it so if
we look at this date class all of these
variables are declared final and as a
reminder that means you cannot reset
them so even though they're public an
outsider who says new date cannot say my
date dot month equals five or something
it will not work the compiler will yell
likewise contrived even though it is not
final there's no code inside the date
class that ever changes contrived and an
outsider obviously cannot access or
change it so in this case date is a
totally immutable object there's no way
that this date object will ever do
anything different another example
strings in Java so it turns out in Java
that when you create a string it will
never change so for example suppose you
have a string and you want to change one
letter in the middle you actually cannot
do that in Java that's just not how
strings work we'll talk a little more
about that in the next slide so the
final key word is a handy idea what it
does for you is it helps the it makes
the compiler enforce the fact that
something cannot change but I will note
that it is neither necessary nor
sufficient to get immutability all it
means is that once you assign a value
you'll never change it ever again
but if you look at date for example and
we just made all of these private it
would still be immutable even with that
final yeah so basically the big picture
with the mutability is it means that the
object once it's created
there's no detectable way to change
anything inside of it so that could be
handy for example in project 2 you may
have some classes that you decide well
once I make one of these things that can
never change and that just helps
simplify your reasoning so as far as the
advantages this goes that's the main
thing it it avoids certain types of bugs
it makes debugging easier it constrains
the set of things you need to worry
about so for example like this mug right
I'm not worried that it's gonna suddenly
turn into lava it's just not on a list
of things to do so I don't have to hold
this mug with a pair of gloves in order
to use it and likewise with a string
whenever you give a string to a function
you can do whatever at once and you know
that once that function finishes running
that your string is exactly how it was
because you know strings are immutable
they cannot be touched they're perfect
and beautiful so the other maybe analogy
I use to take string the string example
even further is strings have a bunch of
methods right they have care at compare
two concat split so concatenate means
concatenate with another string split
means to split it into a bunch of pieces
separated by this it doesn't really
matter but the point is that even if we
use all these fancy features of string
it doesn't affect the string itself and
you know that right there's all these
buttons you can press and sometimes it's
even instance variables you can look at
like windows you can look inside of but
it doesn't matter in a class which we
call immutable if the change there's no
change inside the object that could
never be detected okay now the downsides
of immutability is that if you want to
actually change something you can't so
if I had the entire text of Moby Dick
and maybe I find that queequeg's name is
slightly misspelled somewhere in the
middle you need to advocate a in there
you can't what you have to do is make an
entire copy of Moby Dick again but now
with the missing E and that can cause
performance issues so it's a bit of a
trade-off but I'd say that immutability
is a wonderful idea
you should take it
and project to maybe think about some
classes as immutable now one little tiny
warning just because you declare that a
reference is final does not make the
object referred to by that reference
immutable so if I say public final I
write back string D equals new array DAC
this creates an array Dec and we hold
its address and D but all that final
does is it means we can't take D and
point it at a different array Dec the
actual array deck itself can change so
if you call add last or add first or
whatever it will actually work the thing
that you can't do is on the next line
say D equals some other array okay so
minor point there but something that
sometimes confuses people who are new to
this idea